---
date: 2020-01-09 12:00
description: Automatically updating my site with github pages.
tags: github, blog, site, ci
---
# If it hurts, do it more frequently, and bring the pain forward

Thats a fun quote that sounds nonsensical at the surface level but is rooted in valuable meaning. The more frequent you do something painful, the less painful it'll seem. Thats where [Continuous Integration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration)  comes into play.

This blog post is about how I managed to host Silverpoint on github and to set it up so that anytime I commit my changes to the site, they get updated on the internet as well without me having to lift another finger.

## Hosting through Github Pages

In the past I've leveraged anything from [godaddy](https://godaddy.com) or [hostgator](https://hostgator.com) to Amazon's server infrastructure or even S3 static buckets for website hosting. In the spirit of trying new things I decided to give github a chance this time around.

[Github](https://pages.github.com) allows you to serve websites from the git repository containing its code as long  as long as you follow a specific naming convention and your repo has an index.html file. This is pretty convenient for people who want to host their own personal site or their company site without having to rely on a more complicated third party provider. 

After setting up my empty [repository](https://github.com/hggz/hggz.github.io) I was pretty much halfway done. The next part gets a little tricky though.

## Website Content and Personal Repositories

As of this post's creation, github only allows personal websites to be served from the <code class="inline">master</code> branch of a repository. That means that all your website code (especially the index.html) has to live in your <code class="inline">master</code> branch. Organizations on the other hand can point their website code to a specific branch to be served from. Since I chose to have Silverpoint hosted as a personal repository, I had to work around this limitation.

Since all the HTML that *Publish* generates lives inside of the *Output* folder, I created a separate repository that only contained the contents of this Output folder and set that as the master branch. I kept all the other *Publish* specific files separate from this folder for this step.

Once this master branch was created and pushed up to the github repository, I was already able to access [Silverpoint](https://hggz.github.io) via the github pages domain link. Afterwards I created a separate branch in this repository (called *develop*) that contained all of the *Publish* specific sources such as the <code class="inline">Package.swift</code> file, the <code class="inline">Content</code> folder, <code class="inilne">Resources</code>, etc. Now we're ready to set up the repository to automatically update itself when we push to Github.

## Continuous Integration Setup

Recently Github released their CI flow known as [Github Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) to the general public. This allows us to specify a workflow in our project to be executed after pushing up a commit to our repository.

For our purposes, we need a workflow that will run Publish's CLI and generate our static site's new changes in the <code class="inline">Output</code> folder.

For that we need a build instance that has Swift installed as well as Publish's CI in order to run the <code class="inline">publish run</code> command inside our repo.